the talk I'm giving today is called from
five to a hundred million founder
secrets of scaling a multi-product
startup
um I'm really excited to talk about this
because this is something I really
deeply believe in and that I think has
been kind of like a an open secret
behind a lot of great companies that I
think is like somewhat under discussed
and my goal today on some level is to
convince you that many more companies
should be multi-product than are and
that for the types of companies that uh
being multi-product makes sense maybe
going earlier than you thought could be
a could be a good idea
um I'm the founder of lattice so
obviously this is uh we're a
multi-product company we've built four
products Suites over our eight years of
existence so I do have some sort of
survivorship bias in this belief but um
I do really believe that the ideas that
I'm going to share here today are
applicable to the majority of companies
today
so this is a visual that I think we're
probably all somewhat familiar with this
is like a market landscape that you know
somebody at an investment firm probably
made and this is what it looks like in
some narrow segment of a relatively
niche market uh if you perhaps maybe
zoom out to a slightly broader set of
categories and you open up a couple more
adjacencies of what the product does uh
you might get to a market map that looks
like this and they're probably missing a
ton in here
um you know you look at even like a YC
batch there are hundreds of great
companies going through YC every six
months and that's like one percent of
all the companies that applied and
there's huge ecosystems outside of it
you know you zoom back five years or
eight years or 12 years and the sort of
breadth of companies is just narrower
now any startup that gets started did
any reasonable category has
many or dozens of competitors and that's
sort of just the way it is and so uh my
belief is that multi-product in 2023 and
going forward is one of the best
strategies that you have uh to compete
it's a great Dimension to compete
against this backdrop before I get into
a little bit of like the tactics of how
to do it and what it looks like and some
pitfalls I want to just start with why
this is happening uh I think by
understanding the mechanism of why we
got to this place that'll help you
understand sort of how to approach it
and what it means for you
so Jason talks about this all the time
but it's worth repeating we are like so
many years into cloud and yet here we
are uh at hundreds of billions in the
annual Cloud spend and we're still
growing 6X over like eight years at this
kind of scale that's that's unbelievable
and so the demand from companies to use
cloud software is just going to
naturally lead to a ton of Supply uh but
there's more than just like the basic
economics of it there's a bunch of sort
of uh micro reasons at the company level
why things have changed the first is
that it's become much cheaper to build
software like in the past like in the
far past you had to like set up servers
but even like once we got past that we
didn't have nearly the ability for
people to build really high quality
products extremely cheaply you look at
brand new startups with a couple smart
Founders you can be in a dorm room and
have a laptop and a couple subscriptions
and you can you can build something
great and that didn't used to be the
case so that's one
another is that it's the the sort of
shoulders that we are all standing on
when we build software now is
unbelievable compared to what it's been
in the past they're incredible libraries
there are great Integrations out of the
box with other companies that you can
pull into there are just so many reasons
why now the toolian systems let you
build better products so now any
everybody is armed in a way where they
can build better products cheaper faster
um
on top of that the access to Capital is
much better so you know there's
obviously a real surge in 2021 Adventure
Capital it declined obviously recently
but generally speaking the overall trend
if you look out over years or decades
has been many more dollars going into
the space and so what you see is rather
than just a few companies with real
traction getting funded is anytime
there's a good idea a ton of companies
can raise Capital build early teams and
build these great products and so the
capital going in behind the companies
has obviously changed and then this is a
super important final point that
startups are no longer Fringe you know
when I like graduated from college I
guess like 12 13 years ago it was not
really even then which was you know many
years into attack it was still not the
case that everybody wanted to go into
Tech today the big Finance firms are
competing with the big Tech firms trying
to lure talent and it's super mainstream
and so it means now that lots and lots
of smart people who used to work in
other Industries now work in Tech and so
the supply of talent for companies just
looks completely different obviously
and so given that backdrop where it is
cheaper easier faster to build high
quality products where markets are more
crowded than ever
it's become my view that I hold pretty
dearly that multi-products companies is
one of the best ways that you can
compete given this sort of reality that
we live in now
um
a quick instance that I'm most familiar
with obviously is lattice where we've
built many products over over the years
we started in okrs and performance but
over time we expanded out to a bunch of
other products and I think the the thing
that I learned doing this with lattice
is that you don't the right way to do it
isn't just building sort of random
products that you think your buyer might
want to build but instead thinking about
the user journey and what does this sort
of human who's using your products what
else exists chronologically in their in
their day what else do they need and
sort of take them through a journey so
you know as an example for lattice it
might be you on board at the company you
need to get set up with your goals you
need to have one-on-one with your
manager you're going to go through a
quarter you're going to get feedback
you're going to share back how you're
feeling and you sort of think in those
terms and this applies to basically
every software category and that can
kind of guide your guide your roadmap
and lead to a much more holistic
solution for customers
um
I sort of share this timeline of when we
built our products uh for a couple
reasons the first is you'll see that
we've done it consistently but there's
like you know years between each of
these products uh it doesn't come
quickly uh it takes time to build these
things and it's really hard work
building a multi-product startup is
definitely extremely challenging just to
give you like a quick sort of tangible
story that applies to at least lattices
it really is
um we launched with okrs that was not
really where we got footing we got uh we
got a foothold with Performance
Management in 2016 but then in 2018 we
built our first sort of second product
um
and the shape of the way that went is we
were at 2 million of error and we had
seven engineers and we put five of them
on this engagement product for like nine
months and so that was like painful that
year felt like chewing glass we you know
we were defunding the effort on the
current product we had all of these you
know the majority of our resources going
to this thing that wasn't yet in Market
um and it you know that was that was a
difficult uh period to go through and so
it's not to say that the stuff is
without cost like breadth and product
depth absolutely are in some amount of
tension but I'll talk about the ways
that you can resolve them uh but what we
found time and time again is that when
we got through the tunnel of building
these second products and the challenge
of that on the other side we were
rewarded with these huge benefits
um a quick disclaimer before I talk
about those benefits is that I'm
definitely not advocating for infinite
breadth uh there's judgment call and
every company is different there are
real trade-offs to these things and when
you go too wide too quickly you do trade
off the ability to serve customers in
certain ways but um uh what I'm
advocating for is that most companies
should be pushing this thinking further
than they are
so just to walk out like the quick value
of what was so helpful about being
multi-product and what we've experienced
in every juncture
um first just think about sort of like
the the demand side like what's in it
for the customer
that slide I showed you at the beginning
of the market landscape that's what the
customer is facing too it's like
dizzying when you're looking at that and
you're trying to figure out geez I need
to do 19 things and they each have 14
vendors like what's going on here and so
it's really helpful to the vendor if
you're like I can take care of multiple
things for you in one solution so you're
not you know sitting on tons and tons of
software and vendor relationships I
remember at lattice we looked at some
point a couple years ago and we had like
370 vendors or something like that and
it's just like a lot for the company to
manage you're also going to get a deeper
data connection between the products so
to the extent that the products tied
together in a relevant way it'll be
easier inside one solution than If
you're sort of stapling across companies
the cost of ownership tends to be
cheaper I'll talk about that more in a
bit but generally speaking when you buy
from a multi-product company you'll get
cheaper pricing overall even though
you're paying that company more than uh
you would pay for like uh you know an
individual SKU
and then it's just way less taxing to
employees that people have to roll it
out that people have to use it another
login and OCTA it just makes things
easier and then on the supply side you
actually get it turns out you do get a
lot of benefits too it's not just
trade-offs
um your go to market gets unbelievably
more efficient uh the cost of selling a
net new customer is unbelievably higher
than the cost of selling an existing
customer or just renewing a company with
sort of a new product you do get some
product advantages through data
Integrations getting much stronger you
get shared ux patterns so usage gets
easier you might have elements that you
can copy over so it's faster to build
the next product and then you get much
stronger customer relationships you just
get a deeper connection Point you're
more embedded in their workflows you
have more reasons for them to stay with
you to buy more from you and so the
relationship does grow
so
the the way that we saw things happen in
the funnel was uh surprising to us each
time because the the impact of the the
second product was not always what we
expected but let me walk out for you
like what the advantages are because a
lot of people I think think oh it's just
going to give me higher pricing and
that's the value but it turns out that
that's like often or maybe even mostly
not it so one is you can think about
your growth curve inflecting at the top
of the funnel with more leads you're
going to have more reasons to talk to
customers you're going to have more
touch points with people you're going to
have an innovation story to tell people
who maybe weren't interested in your
first product but are interested in your
second product are going to come to you
so you're going to end up getting more
leads you're going to end up with better
conversion rates once people are in your
funnel they're going to have more
reasons to buy it's going to seem
cheaper to them you might hit people who
weren't as you know uh desperately in
need of your first product but need your
second one so you're going to get a
lifted conversion you're going to get a
higher price uh Point per customer which
is the one that everybody expects but uh
is not always what ends up happening but
you do generally speaking get the
ability to add pricing and then you're
going to get better retention some
amount of customers both are you know
are going to want to stay with you
longer because you've got more touch
points in in their system and in their
workflows
um
interestingly for example when we
launched our engagement product in 2018
we had a humongous lift we almost
doubled our quarterly bookings rate uh
overnight when we launched it but then
when you pulled it open like 20 percent
of the lift was explained by the higher
pricing almost all of it was explained
by the better conversion rate and more
leads and so in that case you know
that's what happened we've had other
products where the balance is different
but just know that when you build these
products every part of your funnel
stands a chance to improve and it all
compounds
so the logistics hopefully that was like
a you know a good case for like what the
value can be and now talking about some
of the logistics so I'm I'm not going to
talk about the building of the products
because it's almost too nuanced per
company it's like out of scope for a
talk like this it's like a whole uh you
know it's a whole thing uh but I did
just have to throw up for fun like the
very uh this is like month one of
lattice when we were building our first
products and there's so much of the
craft there and all of the go to market
stuff that I'm about to talk about that
only exists on the back of a quality
product that real customers need it's it
is in many ways back to Day Zero back to
the product Market fit moment of us you
know of starting a company and so like
there's I'm not sort of I'm I'm glossing
over that part but in many senses that's
the most important bit
so on the taking it to Market I
obviously every company is going to be
unique every product is going to be
unique every competitive landscape it's
going to be unique but let me just share
a few of the things that are going to be
worth thinking about uh when you when
you build multiple products so the first
is on go to market teams on your new
business teams uh some of the things
you're going to want to think about are
what are the ways that you're going to
set ARR goals and other targets
um there are many cases in which setting
ambitious schools will help you there
are going to be times when actually
attaching ARR goals is not going to be
helpful to you and you really just want
to be getting distribution but this is
something that you really want to think
about and like what are those incentives
second is going to be who's going to do
the selling do you want to have an
overlay team that only sells this new
product or are you going to try to
enable your entire entire sales force
and this question exists whether you
have two sales reps or 12 or 50.
um they're just fundamentally different
things and it has to do with the
complexity how able are you to train is
it the exact same buyer but that's a
really important thing to think about
are you going to have net new sellers
are you going to have your current sort
of account management team do the
selling those questions really matter
one thing to note and I've seen this at
lattice I've seen this at a lot of other
companies is surprisingly you would
think generally speaking you would
expect to see
um like more velocity on Cross sell
because you already have the customer
relationship what tons of companies find
is it actually comes more easily on the
net new side than on the cross-sell side
for various reasons and this won't be
true for every product but just knowing
that you're going to get surprised and
your intuitions won't always be exactly
right so not always over planning but
getting in Market quickly and then going
back to that zero to one mindset is
really important
the second logistical set of questions
is around making your customers
successful
um the if there's one point that I think
is important to remember here it's the
difference in maturity curves of your
different products so
you've got your first product which is
going to be up some maturity curve it's
going to be battle tested it'll be
hardened in the wild you're going to
have customers who've used the thing
you're going to have like integrated
real product feedback and you're going
to know how to talk about it how to sell
it how to talk about competitors and
it's going to have some amount of
maturity and you got this new thing that
has zero maturity and it's a day one
product so like how do you do that
generally what we found is you have to
go back to the reasons why a startup can
compete with the big company and a
startup can compete with a big company
usually on the basis of individuals who
are making up for the lack of all of
that institutional experience with great
care attention to detail White Glove
service and when you do that and you can
segment that out on the post sale side
you can get incredible results but you
have to remember that these majority
curves are just fundamentally different
for your current products and your new
ones
on the marketing side the biggest
learning we've had is that it's hard to
evolve your brand and your your story to
customers
um it took us a long time after
launching new products to get customers
to know that we had those new products
we thought we were beating the drum on
it but we learned that even years after
2018 when we had launched our second
product people still just thought we had
a Performance Management product so you
really have to find ways to transform
your story to do product marketing to
make sure your customers know that to
enable your sales force because if
you've gotten to like a mini brand or a
full brand your customers are going to
think of you as that first thing
um the fourth point is existing
customers and distribution it is just
it's it is this is like this this is the
centrality of the advantage uh it's that
cross-selling and bundling is much more
effective to the company it is so much
cheaper to do it drives so much better
attention and so you want that to be
happening but back to the maturity curve
point it is easier for everybody in your
org to not do the new thing they know
how to do the old com the old product
your customers know what they know how
to talk about it it's easier to sell
they're going to get more commissions so
you have to find ways to design
incentives so that individuals want to
make that happen and you can do that not
just through financial incentives uh you
can talk about it you can make it a
company Mission uh but uh certainly
designing it that way helps too so those
are the four logistic things I realize
those are uh more prompts than they are
answers but every situation is unique
and it just takes a lot of thought
experimentation and effort
um okay the last thing I want to talk
about uh is some of the pitfalls that I
think you can get into as you go into
multi-product companies
um obviously a startup at all is full of
the pitfalls there's a million things
that can go wrong uh finding the happy
path is very challenging but when you're
in multi-product you definitely do
compound sort of the surface area on
which things can can get weird
um so I want to talk about a few of
those the first is Clarity of ownership
which probably we all are focused on
that concept no matter what what I've
found is that when it comes to building
and then taking to Market new products
having unbelievably clear ownership is
really essential or everything gets
tripped up over over everything so when
you uh when you build one of the things
that I think you end up needing to do is
really cordon off for example the
resources on the engineering product
side and make clear who owns it because
there's going to be an existing draw for
engineering and product resources on
your current on your current products
like you're going to have you know
hopefully lots of customers by the time
you're on your second product who are
banging down the door saying I need this
thing tomorrow I want this for my
renewal a sales person is going to be
like hey we can we can beat our
competitor if we build this thing but
you're like I'm trying to you know
you're trying to build this new product
and so having this clear ownership
structure where you figure out up front
who's doing what and then you really
Empower those groups and you protect
them is like the only way that you can
make it happen because the natural pull
will go against that
the second is preparing for post sales
on the new product and
um if you're not intentional here things
can things can get really challenging
and it's all to do with that maturity
curve and so what you need to remember
is you're going to launch this thing and
all of a sudden your your uh your
customer base is going to pull you
really hard to want to like swoosh all
those resources back to the first
product because people have been waiting
the roadmap got backed up but you
launched a product that is just nascent
so you have to figure out a way to keep
investing in that product you have to
keep those lines clear somehow while
getting back to your current product
um so there's a couple things here but
uh the the key is that you're going to
be tempted to defund the product after
you've gone to Market and it's actually
the better that new product's doing the
more important it is to not defund that
product and keep leaning into that
investment keep having the go to market
teams wanting to incentivize it and sort
of don't let off the gas because we all
know from even launching one product
that nothing gets off the around that
quickly and so you gotta you gotta keep
sort of the separation here once you've
launched
um a third sort of Pitfall I think a lot
of companies can get into is around the
question of build versus buy let's say
you know this next product category you
want to get into you fundamentally have
two choices you can build it yourself
in-house or you can buy another company
I'll reveal my bias which is I think
that the vast majority of the time
building is better than buying I think
buying companies particularly when
you're small comes with a huge amount of
overhead that is hard to foresee you
have to integrate the team the culture
the product you're not going to have the
Integrations it's generally speaking
going to be more expensive than if you
just build it in-house it's going to be
a huge distraction to your leadership
team relative to building an in-house
um you might have different Tech stacks
and so it just it's it's not the optimal
path most of the time so I'm a huge
believer that when you can the until you
know companies are big and there's real
leaders that you're considering and I
think at the early stage purchases of
products are often challenging
um there are a couple caveats obviously
Acquisitions do make sense and there are
situations where they can transform
companies
um one is when you're buying a true
winner or a true number two in a
category that you know will be like just
too hard to compete into that's
strategically critical and you've got
enough scale to pull that off I think
that's that's one
a second which happens at a smaller
scale is there are instances where a
different company or team has done a
long complicated build that will
actually take you a very long time and
you won't have the product expertise to
do and so you're acquiring like years
worth of r d and a team that really
knows how to build it there are
instances where that has worked really
well
and then the last is if you have to and
when you have to is when the market is
moving so quickly that you just need to
get on the map and it's worth it to go
faster even if it's a little bit Messier
because otherwise things are going to
get away from you and so buying today
and then spending the next you know 12
months integrating can in some of those
instances be preferable to building for
12 months and not coming out for 12
months but generally speaking I think
buying uh is a last resort situation
rather than than building yourself but
you know that's that's a bias uh the
fourth uh Pitfall that I've experienced
is you really need to simplify
everything everything wants to get
complicated once you're multi-product
the way that you're Building Product
gets more complicated the way you're
talking about go to market the way
you're thinking about commissions all of
it just gets complicated and the world
is a complicated place you have to have
some of that but wherever you can look
for ways to make it simpler make the
goals clearer make the plan simpler you
know streamline the people on the
project it always makes things easier
because there so much natural Trend
towards complexity
and the last I talked about a little bit
is the company resourcing thing more
than any other
sort of project I've ever worked on at
least and that you know by projects I
mean a new product but also things like
going International changing segments
trying to expand into a new industry
standing up a new function more than any
of those a new product both the build
and the launch can suck company
resources at a rate that you didn't
expect and so the the only antidote that
I know for this is to go in with some
clarity of this is not that important
I'm only willing to invest 10 of company
resources on it maybe the number is 40
percent maybe it's a bet the company
thing and you're like I'm willing to
invest 70 for a year you know
um but if you don't have that clarity as
you go into it uh you'll it you you can
get trapped like extremely quickly and
so having that up front I think is is
really important
okay so just to summarize the the key
takeaways I shared
um the first is that we are in an
extremely and increasingly noisy SAS
Market which is natural and the market
is getting bigger and bigger each year
and so it is just sort of The Way of the
World
um but multi-product given that context
where building products is cheaper than
ever taking products to Market is sort
of more expensive than ever
multi-product I believe is one of the
most powerful forms of differentiation
that's available to many companies
number two is that when this is done
well it actually is better for everyone
it is like a truly better experience for
customers in many cases it's a truly
better uh go to market machine for
companies in better cases and the
results should be better software
um and so this is the path I believe
that leads to better solutions for
customers over time
um and then the last point which I
alluded to many times to the talk is is
really hard that's that's the catch of
this whole thing is it is super hard uh
and so getting advice from people who
have done it before who can help you see
around some of the corners hiring people
onto your team who have worked in a
multi-product context uh the more advice
you can and then just sort of mentally
preparing for a more challenging build
but uh the the rewards on the other side
are very high so that's my talk thank
you
[Applause]